
# Social Guidelines

The goal of this code of conduct is to provide guidelines for an inclusive & welcoming community. We
would like everyone in the Zouk scene to have a relaxed and enjoyable time in classes & in socials.
Keeping to these guidelines will help with that.

If you feel someone is failing to follow these rules & suggestions then please talk to one of the
teaching staff and we will deal with it.

For our hard rules on behaviour involving any kind of harassment please see our [code of
conduct](https://github.com/michaeljones/dance-code-of-conduct/blob/master/Code.md).


## Unsolicited dance advice & teaching

Social dances are about having fun, relaxing and enjoying the night. It is important not to
criticise, or to offer feedback or advice on the dance floor unless the other person explicitly asks
you for it. Even then do your best to exercise kindness, consideration and an awareness of your own
limits & faults. If you have any doubts at all, consider directing them to a teacher for feedback.

You might personally feel that you would welcome feedback, but for many people this can be hurtful,
distressing or annoying and it can ruin their mood and their night. It goes against our goals of
building an inclusive community where all feel welcome.

This also applies to classes where unsolicited teaching can disrupt the flow of the class, make it
hard for other students to hear the teacher speak and can include incorrect information.


## Asking & accepting requests for dances

It is completely acceptable to turn down a dance for any reason. Please be polite but do not feel
obliged to dance because someone has asked. 'No, thank you' is a suitably polite response. If
someone does say 'no', please do not repeatedly ask them again through the session. Allow them to
ask you for a dance when they are ready.

This still applies when there is an imbalance between the number of leaders & followers. If there
are very few followers or leaders, they do not have a responsibility to dance more in order to make
up the imbalance. We all deserve to be allowed to rest or to refuse a dance.

It can be hard to be turned down when asking for a dance, but please bear in mind that our community
will be a happier place if everyone feels that they can dance when they want to rather than feeling
obligated to dance every time they are asked. 

That said, please try to dance with everyone if you can. Particularly with beginners that might be
shy or nervous.


## Personal hygiene

Dancing involves being in close proximity to other people. It is important to take care with your
personal hygiene. You should shower before the event and wear freshly washed clothes. You should
have cleaned your teeth and use mints to avoid bad breath.

It is respectful to wear deodorant but not to wear heavy cologne or perfume which can be
overwhelming for your partner.


## Clothing

There isn't a general dress code for dancing Zouk. You should wear what you are comfortable with.
That said, you should avoid wearing things that might get caught during a dance. This means that you
should avoid wearning necklaces, bracelets and watches. It is also better for leaders to avoid
wearing button-up shirts as the follower's hair can be tangled in the buttons.

Due to the position of the close embrace it is also standard for leaders to empty their front-right
pockets whilst dancing. Other pockets are fine to use.


## Dating & Pick up lines

Social dancing is a great way to meet new people, however we come to enjoy the dance, not to be hit
on. When we try something new like dancing it is often outside of our comfort zone and a little bit
scary. It takes time to get used to and a bit of courage to keep coming back. If we also have to
deal with strangers hitting on us and potentially making us feel uncomfortable then it makes the
situation worse. 

Of course, if you see someone regularly at dancing and feel like you’re building up a genuine
connection with them, then please feel free to ask them for coffee. But be respectful of their
response.


## Respecting Other People’s Boundaries

Two people who are comfortable with each other can dance Zouk in a very close embrace. However it is
important to keep in mind that we all have different limits on what we find comfortable. In any
dance situation, we should respect the personal space of our partner and so if one person is
comfortable in the close embrace, but the other isn’t, we would not dance in the close embrace.

As a general rule, always approach your first dances with new people/dancers using an open position,
and movements that allow plenty of personal space.


## Partner Safety

It is important to avoid movements that could possibly injure your partner.

For leaders this means avoiding positions where your partner is not comfortable. In particular a
leader should pay special attention to not over bending or stressing their partner's back & spine.
The leader should always be responsible for their own weight and should not be in a position where
they are leaning over their partner in a way that distributes the leader's weight on to the partner.
This is particularly important during the 'back' position in head movements.

The lead should never be rough. If the follower does not follow a move, always adapt the
movement rather than adding more force. The lead should be light; it should only be 'firm' enough
to be clear but no firmer. Using more force than necessary can make the dance uncomfortable and
unsafe for your partner, particularly for beginners who are less likely to be able to adapt and keep
up.

The follower should take responsibility for their own weight. This means that during cambres and
dips the follower should support their own weight as much as they possibly can. If the leader leads
the follower out of their balance then the follower cannot fully support their own weight.  However
the follower should try to keep their muscles engaged as that reduces the effort required by the
leader and helps to protect the follower.

The follower should not initiate any cambres, dips, drops or any motion that requires the leader to
support them as leader must be prepared for such movements and if they happen unexpectedly they can
damage the leader's back.
